Add analysis-kuromoji plugin documentation (#12924)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _analyzers/language-analyzers/kuromoji.md

---
layout: default
title: Kuromoji (Japanese)
parent: Language analyzers
grand_parent: Analyzers
nav_order: 225
---

# Kuromoji analyzer

> The `kuromoji` analyzer provides morphological analysis for Japanese text using the Kuromoji library backed by the MeCab IPAdic dictionary. It segments Japanese sentences into meaningful tokens, removes common stop words and grammatical particles, and returns tokens in their dictionary base form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `kuromoji` analyzer provides morphological analysis for Japanese text using the Kuromoji library backed by the IPAdic dictionary. It segments Japanese sentences into meaningful tokens, removes common stop words and grammatical particles, and returns tokens in their dictionary base form.
```

Reviewer: Kuromoji doesn't depend on MeCab. Lucene's [`DictionaryBuilder`](https://github.com/apache/lucene/blob/main/lucene/analysis/kuromoji/src/java/org/apache/lucene/analysis/ja/dict/DictionaryBuilder.java) references only `IPADIC` and `UNIDIC` as dictionary formats.

To use the `kuromoji` analyzer or any Kuromoji components, you must first install the `analysis-kuromoji` plugin.

## Installing the plugin

Install the plugin on all nodes and then restart the cluster:

```bash

> sudo bin/opensearch-plugin install analysis-kuromoji

Reviewer: It seems `kuromoji-completion.md` L15 and other docs uses the same command without `sudo`. Suggest aligning.

```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

For more information about installing plugins, see [Installing plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/plugins/).

## Kuromoji plugin components

The `analysis-kuromoji` plugin provides the following components that you can use independently or combine in custom analyzers.

### Analyzers

| Analyzer | Description |
|:---------|:------------|
| [`kuromoji`](#how-the-kuromoji-analyzer-works) | Built-in Japanese analyzer. Segments text, removes stop words, and normalizes tokens to their base form. |

> | [`kuromoji_completion`](#kuromoji_completion-analyzer) | Analyzer designed for autocomplete of Japanese text. Generates both Katakana and Romaji reading variants. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`kuromoji_completion`](#kuromoji_completion-analyzer) | Analyzer designed for autocomplete of Japanese text. Generates the original Japanese tokens along with their Romaji reading variants. |
```

Reviewer: "both Katakana and Romaji reading variants" is inaccurate — `kuromoji_completion` emits Romaji variants only, not Katakana. Katakana readings are produced by `kuromoji_readingform`, which is a different filter.

      "type": "word",
      "position": 0
    },
    {
      "token": "図書館",
      "start_offset": 3,
      "end_offset": 6,
      "type": "word",
      "position": 2
    },
    {
      "token": "勉強",
      "start_offset": 7,
      "end_offset": 9,
      "type": "word",
      "position": 4
    }
  ]
}
```

## Example: Custom kuromoji analyzer

The following example creates a custom `kuromoji` analyzer that uses `user_dictionary_rules` to register inline custom terms:

```json
PUT /japanese-custom-index
{
  "settings": {
    "analysis": {
      "analyzer": {
        "my_kuromoji": {
          "type": "kuromoji",
          "mode": "search",
          "user_dictionary_rules": [
            "東京スカイツリー,東京 スカイツリー,トウキョウ スカイツリー,カスタム名詞"
          ]
        }
      }
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "title": {
        "type": "text",
        "analyzer": "my_kuromoji"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Test the custom analyzer with a sentence containing the registered term ("I went to Tokyo Skytree"):

```json
POST /japanese-custom-index/_analyze
{
  "analyzer": "my_kuromoji",
  "text": "東京スカイツリーに行きました"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The analyzer uses the custom dictionary rule to segment `東京スカイツリー` into `東京` and `スカイツリー`. The default Katakana stemmer (`kuromoji_stemmer`) then removes the trailing long vowel mark from `スカイツリー` to produce `スカイツリ`, while particles (`に`) and auxiliary verbs (`ました`) are removed, and `行きました` is normalized to its base form `行く`:

Reviewer: Kuromoji splits `行きました` into three tokens (`行き`, `まし`, `た`), so `ました` is not a single auxiliary verb. `kuromoji_baseform` normalizes `行き` to `行く`, and `kuromoji_part_of_speech` removes `まし` and `た` separately.

```json
{
  "tokens": [
    {
      "token": "東京",
      "start_offset": 0,
      "end_offset": 2,
      "type": "word",
      "position": 0
    },
    {
      "token": "スカイツリ",
      "start_offset": 2,
      "end_offset": 8,
      "type": "word",
      "position": 1
    },
    {
      "token": "行く",
      "start_offset": 9,
      "end_offset": 11,
      "type": "word",
      "position": 3
    }
  ]
}
```

## kuromoji_completion analyzer

The `kuromoji_completion` analyzer is designed for autocomplete use cases. It generates both the original Japanese tokens and their Romaji (Latin script) reading variants, allowing users to search for Japanese content by typing in either Japanese characters or their romanized equivalents.

The analyzer accepts the following parameters.

Parameter | Data type | Description
:--- | :--- | :---

> `mode` | String | Completion mode. Valid values are `index` (default) and `query`. Use `index` in the index analyzer to generate all reading variants; use `query` in the search analyzer to generate the query-side reading.

Reviewer: This reads as if only `index` mode generates variants. Actually both modes emit variants; `query` mode additionally merges Kana with trailing lowercase letters (mid-typing IME input, e.g. `コンピュ` + `t` → `konpyut`) so autocomplete matches on in-progress input.

Reviewer: To clarify my earlier comment: both modes emit Romaji variants when given complete text like `コンピューター`. The actual difference is how they handle partial IME input like `コンピュt` (Kana + trailing alphabet from mid-typing): index mode splits it into `[コンピュ, t]`, while query mode merges it as `コンピュt` → `konpyut`. This is why the pair is needed — index mode indexes completed text, query mode handles in-progress input. The current description doesn't convey this split.

```json
PUT /japanese-icu-index
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "analysis": {
        "analyzer": {
          "japanese_icu_analyzer": {
            "char_filter": [
              "icu_normalizer",
              "kuromoji_iteration_mark"
            ],
            "tokenizer": "kuromoji_tokenizer",
            "filter": [
              "kuromoji_baseform",
              "kuromoji_part_of_speech",
              "ja_stop",
              "kuromoji_stemmer",
              "lowercase"
            ]
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Test the combined analyzer with a sentence containing full-width digits and a long vowel mark ("The computer processes 300 documents"):

```json
POST /japanese-icu-index/_analyze
{
  "analyzer": "japanese_icu_analyzer",
  "text": "コンピューターは３００件の文書を処理します"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The analyzer applies the following transformations:
- `icu_normalizer` converts full-width digits before tokenization: `３００` → `300`
- `kuromoji_stemmer` removes the trailing long vowel mark: `コンピューター` → `コンピュータ`

> - `kuromoji_part_of_speech` removes the particles `は`, `の`, and `を`, and the auxiliary verb `します`

Reviewer: `処理します` splits into `処理`, `し`, `ます`, not a single token. And `kuromoji_part_of_speech` doesn't remove all of it: it removes `ます` (auxiliary), but `し` (verb `する` in ren'yōkei) is only removed by the following `ja_stop` filter since `し` is in the `_japanese_` stop set.
